she evidently considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by smiling, but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who was going to join the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could, like natasha and boris, escape from the drawing room.
halfway through supper prince andrew leaned his elbows on the table and, with a look of nervous agitation such as pierre had never before seen on his face, began to talk--as one who has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak out.
pierre heard her say: "certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..." the sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants that pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray mane--which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight of for a single moment during the whole service.
as to the last meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she could not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved better during those awful moments--the father who so remembered everything and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief, though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father.
"yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people had brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering, how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in them now!
whether it was the teacher's fault or the pupil's, this same thing happened every day: the princess' eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear anything, but was only conscious of her stern father's withered face close to her, of his breath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace.
"yes, father, i have come come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant," said prince andrew, following every movement of his father's face with an eager and respectful look.
i confess i understand very little about all these matters of wills and inheritance; but i do know that since this young man, whom we all used to know as plain monsieur pierre, has become count bezukhov and the owner of one of the largest fortunes in russia, i am much amused to watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward him, though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort of fellow.
"he always was rather harsh; and now i should think he's getting very trying," said prince andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their father in order to puzzle or test his sister.
said the countess with a gentle smile, looking at boris' and went on, evidently concerned with a thought that always occupied her: "now you see if i were to be severe with her and to forbid it... goodness knows what they might be up to on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissing), "but as it is, i know every word she utters.
